docs/aquacomputer_d5next.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver aquacomputer-d5next
=================================

Supported devices:

* Aquacomputer Aquaero 5/6 fan controllers
* Aquacomputer D5 Next watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Farbwerk RGB controller
* Aquacomputer Farbwerk 360 RGB controller
* Aquacomputer Octo fan controller
* Aquacomputer Quadro fan controller
* Aquacomputer High Flow Next sensor
* Aquacomputer Leakshield leak prevention system
* Aquacomputer Aquastream XT watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Aquastream Ultimate watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Poweradjust 3 fan controller

Author: Aleksa Savic

Description
-----------

This driver exposes hardware sensors of listed Aquacomputer devices, which
communicate through proprietary USB HID protocols.

The Aquaero devices expose eight temperature sensors and four PWM controllable fans,
along with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current. The PWM fans can be
controlled directly and can be configured as DC or PWM using pwm[1-4]_mode.

For the D5 Next pump, available sensors are pump and fan speed, power, voltage
and current, as well as coolant temperature. Also available through debugfs are
the serial number, firmware version and power-on count. Attaching a fan to it is
optional and allows it to be controlled using temperature curves directly from the
pump. If it's not connected, the fan-related sensors will report zeroes.

The pump can be configured either through software or via its physical
interface. Configuring the pump and the other devices through this driver 
is not implemented completely, as it seems to require sending it a complete 
configuration. That includes addressable RGB LEDs, for which there is no standard
sysfs interface. Thus, that task is better suited for userspace tools.

The Octo exposes four temperature sensors and eight PWM controllable fans, along
with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current.

The Quadro exposes four temperature sensors, a flow sensor and four PWM controllable fans,
along with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current.

The High Flow Next exposes +5V voltages, water quality, conductivity and flow readings.
A temperature sensor can be connected to it, in which case it provides its reading
and an estimation of the dissipated/absorbed power in the liquid cooling loop.

The Leakshield exposes two temperature sensors and coolant pressure (current, min, max and
target readings). It also exposes the estimated reservoir volume and how much of it is
filled with coolant. Pump RPM and flow can be set to enhance on-device calculations.

The Aquastream XT pump exposes temperature readings for the coolant, external sensor
and fan IC. It also exposes pump and fan voltages, as well as pump current.

The Aquastream Ultimate pump exposes coolant temp and an external temp sensor, along
with speed, power, voltage and current of both the pump and optionally connected fan.
It also exposes pressure and flow speed readings.

The Poweradjust 3 controller exposes a single external temperature sensor.

The possible values for pwm_enable are:
for D5 Next, Quadro and Octo

= =================
0 no change
1 manual pwm mode
2 PID control mode
3 fan curve mode
= =================

additionally for Quadro and Octo

= ===============
4 follow fan1 pwm
5 follow fan2 pwm
6 follow fan3 pwm
7 follow fan4 pwm
= ===============

additionally for Octo

== ===============
8  follow fan5 pwm
9  follow fan6 pwm
10 follow fan7 pwm
11 follow fan8 pwm
== ===============

The Farbwerk and Farbwerk 360 expose four temperature sensors. Depending on the device,
not all sysfs and debugfs entries will be available.

Usage notes
-----------

The devices communicate via HID reports. The driver is loaded automatically by
the kernel and supports hotswapping.

Sysfs entries
-------------

=========================== ==============================================================
temp[1-20]_input            Physical/virtual temperature sensors (in millidegrees Celsius)
temp[1-4]_offset            Temperature sensor correction offset (in millidegrees Celsius)
fan[1-8]_input              Pump/fan speed (in RPM) / Flow speed (in dL/h)
fan5_pulses                 Quadro flow sensor pulses
power[1-8]_input            Pump/fan power (in micro Watts)
in[0-7]_input               Pump/fan voltage (in milli Volts)
curr[1-8]_input             Pump/fan current (in milli Amperes)
pwm[1-8]                    Fan PWM (0 - 255)
pwm[1-8]_enable             Fan control mode
pwm[1-8]_auto_channels_temp Fan control temperature sensors select
pwm[1-4]_mode               Fan mode (DC or PWM)
=========================== ===============================================================

Debugfs entries
---------------

================ =================================================
serial_number    Serial number of the device
firmware_version Version of installed firmware
power_cycles     Count of how many times the device was powered on
================ =================================================

Commit message:

Differentiate between Aquaero 5 and 6 (#70)
Inspired-by: https://github.com/leoratte/aquacomputer_d5next-hwmon/commit/56df919595c49ec2c6b4837c71f78643b81c247f

Signed-off-by: Aleksa Savic <savicaleksa83@gmail.com>

docs/aquacomputer_d5next.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver aquacomputer-d5next
=================================

Supported devices:

* Aquacomputer Aquaero 5/6 fan controllers
* Aquacomputer D5 Next watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Farbwerk RGB controller
* Aquacomputer Farbwerk 360 RGB controller
* Aquacomputer Octo fan controller
* Aquacomputer Quadro fan controller
* Aquacomputer High Flow Next sensor
* Aquacomputer Leakshield leak prevention system
* Aquacomputer Aquastream XT watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Aquastream Ultimate watercooling pump
* Aquacomputer Poweradjust 3 fan controller

Author: Aleksa Savic

Description
-----------

This driver exposes hardware sensors of listed Aquacomputer devices, which
communicate through proprietary USB HID protocols.

The Aquaero devices expose eight temperature sensors and four PWM controllable fans,
along with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current. The PWM fans can be
controlled directly and can be configured as DC or PWM using pwm[1-4]_mode. Note
that Aquaero 5 can set PWM mode only for the fourth fan.

For the D5 Next pump, available sensors are pump and fan speed, power, voltage
and current, as well as coolant temperature. Also available through debugfs are
the serial number, firmware version and power-on count. Attaching a fan to it is
optional and allows it to be controlled using temperature curves directly from the
pump. If it's not connected, the fan-related sensors will report zeroes.

The pump can be configured either through software or via its physical
interface. Configuring the pump and the other devices through this driver 
is not implemented completely, as it seems to require sending it a complete 
configuration. That includes addressable RGB LEDs, for which there is no standard
sysfs interface. Thus, that task is better suited for userspace tools.

The Octo exposes four temperature sensors and eight PWM controllable fans, along
with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current.

The Quadro exposes four temperature sensors, a flow sensor and four PWM controllable fans,
along with their speed (in RPM), power, voltage and current.

The High Flow Next exposes +5V voltages, water quality, conductivity and flow readings.
A temperature sensor can be connected to it, in which case it provides its reading
and an estimation of the dissipated/absorbed power in the liquid cooling loop.

The Leakshield exposes two temperature sensors and coolant pressure (current, min, max and
target readings). It also exposes the estimated reservoir volume and how much of it is
filled with coolant. Pump RPM and flow can be set to enhance on-device calculations.

The Aquastream XT pump exposes temperature readings for the coolant, external sensor
and fan IC. It also exposes pump and fan voltages, as well as pump current.

The Aquastream Ultimate pump exposes coolant temp and an external temp sensor, along
with speed, power, voltage and current of both the pump and optionally connected fan.
It also exposes pressure and flow speed readings.

The Poweradjust 3 controller exposes a single external temperature sensor.

The possible values for pwm_enable are:
for D5 Next, Quadro and Octo

= =================
0 no change
1 manual pwm mode
2 PID control mode
3 fan curve mode
= =================

additionally for Quadro and Octo

= ===============
4 follow fan1 pwm
5 follow fan2 pwm
6 follow fan3 pwm
7 follow fan4 pwm
= ===============

additionally for Octo

== ===============
8  follow fan5 pwm
9  follow fan6 pwm
10 follow fan7 pwm
11 follow fan8 pwm
== ===============

The Farbwerk and Farbwerk 360 expose four temperature sensors. Depending on the device,
not all sysfs and debugfs entries will be available.

Usage notes
-----------

The devices communicate via HID reports. The driver is loaded automatically by
the kernel and supports hotswapping.

Sysfs entries
-------------

=========================== ==============================================================
temp[1-20]_input            Physical/virtual temperature sensors (in millidegrees Celsius)
temp[1-4]_offset            Temperature sensor correction offset (in millidegrees Celsius)
fan[1-8]_input              Pump/fan speed (in RPM) / Flow speed (in dL/h)
fan5_pulses                 Quadro flow sensor pulses
power[1-8]_input            Pump/fan power (in micro Watts)
in[0-7]_input               Pump/fan voltage (in milli Volts)
curr[1-8]_input             Pump/fan current (in milli Amperes)
pwm[1-8]                    Fan PWM (0 - 255)
pwm[1-8]_enable             Fan control mode
pwm[1-8]_auto_channels_temp Fan control temperature sensors select
pwm[1-4]_mode               Fan mode (DC or PWM)
=========================== ===============================================================

Debugfs entries
---------------

================ ==================================================
serial_number    Serial number of the device
firmware_version Version of installed firmware
power_cycles     Count of how many times the device was powered on
hw_version       Hardware version/revision of device (Aquaero only)
================ ==================================================
